Sql Transaction :- A Transaction is a sequare of operstions performed (using one or more SQL statements) on a database as a single logical unit of work.
Transaction may consist of a single read,write,delete or update opertions or a combination of these.

In MySQL Server, a transaction is a fundamental unit of work that ensures data consistency and integrity within your database operations. It groups multiple SQL statements (like INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE) 
into a single logical unit, ensuring either all the statements succeed or none of them are applied.

Key Concepts of Transactions (ACID Properties):

Atomicity: Ensure that all operatons within the work unit are completed successfully otherwise,the transaction is aborted at the point of failure and prevous operations are
rolled back to their former state.

Consistency: Ensures that the database properly changes state upon a successfully committed transaction.
A transaction ensures that the database transitions from one valid state to another. It enforces data integrity rules and constraints defined on your tables.

Isolation: Enables transactions to operate independetly of and transparent to each other.
Concurrent transactions are isolated from each other, ensuring that the outcome of one transaction doesn't affect the execution of another. This prevents data races and inconsistencies.

Durability: Ensures that the result or effect of a committed transaction persists in case of a system failure.
Once a transaction is committed, the changes are permanently persisted to the database storage. This guarantees that the changes survive even in case of system failures.


Models of the Transctions in SQL Server

Autocommit Transaction :- Autocommit Transaction mode is the default transction for the SQL Server. The Successful statements are commited and the failed statements are rolled 
back immediately.

Implicit Transaction :- This mode enables to sql server to start an implicit transaction for every DML statement but we need to use the commit or rolled back commands explicitly
 at the end of the statements.

Explicit Transaction :- Explicit Transaction mode provides to define a transaction exactly with the starting and ending points of the transaction

Example :-

-- By default, MySQL uses autocommit mode, so each individual SQL statement is automatically committed.
-- For example:
CREATE TABLE ExampleTable (
    ID INT PRIMARY KEY,
    Name VARCHAR(50)
);

-- Insert records into the table (each insert is an individual autocommit transaction)
INSERT INTO ExampleTable (ID, Name) VALUES (1, 'John');
INSERT INTO ExampleTable (ID, Name) VALUES (2, 'Jane');
select * from ExampleTable

-- Autocommit Transaction(By Default)
INSERT INTO ExampleTable (ID, Name) VALUES (3, 'Sunil');
update ExampleTable set name='ABC' where id=2
Delete from ExampleTable where id = 1
select @@TRANCOUNT

-- Implicit Transaction
-- 1. In order to define an implicit transcation, we need to enable the Implicit_Transaction option.
-- 2. SQL Sever automatically starts a transaction with any following statements.
--    Alter Table,Create,Delete,Drop,Fetch,Grant,Insert,Open,Revoke,Select,Truncate Table, and Update
-- 3. Use Commit(Permanent Save) or RollBack(Cancel Trans) always.

SET IMPLICIT_TRANSACTIONS ON 
INSERT INTO ExampleTable (ID, Name) VALUES (4, 'Sumit');
update ExampleTable set name='Harsh' where id=2
Delete from ExampleTable where id = 3
Select @@TRANCOUNT As OpenTransactions 
Rollback
Select @@TRANCOUNT As OpenTransactions 
--- second wise
SET IMPLICIT_TRANSACTIONS ON 
INSERT INTO ExampleTable (ID, Name) VALUES (4, 'Sumit');
update ExampleTable set name='Harsh' where id=2
Delete from ExampleTable where id = 3

Declare @choice INT
set @choice =1;
IF @choice=1
Begin
    Commit
End
Else
Begin
    Rollback
End

--- Explicit Tranction
-- 1. We start to use the Begin Tranaction command beacuse this statement identifies the starting point of the explicit transaction.
-- 2. Use Commit(Permanent save) or RollBack(cancel Trans) always.

Begin Transaction 
INSERT INTO ExampleTable (ID, Name) VALUES (4, 'Sumit');
update ExampleTable set name='Harsh' where id=2
Delete from ExampleTable where id = 3

declare @ch int;
set @ch =1;
if @ch =1
Begin
    commit
End
Else
Begin
     Rollback
End


1. Autocommit Transactions (Default Behavior):

MySQL Server operates in autocommit mode by default.
This means every single SQL statement (e.g., INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE) is treated as an individual transaction.
If a statement succeeds, the changes are committed immediately. If it fails, the operation is rolled back, and no changes are made.

2. Implicit Transactions:

The term "implicit transaction" can sometimes be used interchangeably with autocommit transactions.
However, a subtle difference exists.
Implicit transactions can also occur when you explicitly start a transaction (BEGIN TRANSACTION;) but don't explicitly commit it (COMMIT;).
In this case, MySQL automatically commits the transaction at the end of your SQL statement or when you encounter a semicolon (;).

3. Explicit Transactions:

Offer more granular control over transactions.
You define the boundaries of a transaction using BEGIN TRANSACTION; and COMMIT; statements.
All SQL statements between these markers are treated as a single unit.
You can also use ROLLBACK; within the transaction block to undo all changes if an error occurs.
